going to need that.
Good morning.
Good to be with you this morning.
We are talking a lot about transformation these days.
We're gonna keep talking about it today, but then also, I hope you're planning on joining us after the service.
We've got some food downstairs, a light lunch, and we wanna talk about the life of the church, what our vision, our values are, and what we hope for in the coming year, and how we hope you will participate in that.
When I think about transformation,
I think about it personally, like what it means for me and for you the individual.
I think about it like corporately about your marriages or you as a mom or dad or maybe it's a boss as a leader of some kind.
I think about it corporately as a church.
Like what would it mean for us to be a transformed church?
And then ultimately, and I think this is God's mission,
from Genesis to Revelation is how can we transform this world that has been fallen.
So this is what we're doing.
No small project.
Let's start with prayer.
Heavenly Father, we invite you into this place and into our hearts and into our mind.
We take a deep breath, giving you our anxieties and our worries.
Our concerns, the things that have weighed us down, the things that have hurt us and caused us pain.
God, we hand those to you.
One, because you are the one who can heal them.
And two, because right now, those are not serving us.
Right now, we need a word from you.
We need that breath in our lungs.
we need to be changed by you.
So this is what we seek.
In Christ's name we pray, amen.
All right, we, at the risk of contradicting myself, last week, if you recall, the sermon was about Ephesians chapter four, and I said, your problem is that you're too old and you need to become young again.
Do you remember this?
Hopefully, so the idea being like we need a renewed heart, right, to meet made young again, and the problem is that we have these hearts that have calluses and that have become ossified and calcified, and we have an osteoporosis of the heart, and we need to rip off the calluses and become young again.
At the risk of contradicting myself, today's message starts with, you're too immature and you need to become older and more mature.
Paul says this too.
In a few places, he actually chastises his congregations.
One in Corinthians, and then whoever writes the letter to the Hebrews, they say it this way.
First Corinthians 3-1 through three goes like this.
Brothers and sisters, I can't speak to you as spiritual people, but instead as people of the flesh as infants in Christ.
Infants, he calls them.
I fed you milk.
not solid food for you were not yet ready.
In fact, you are still not ready for you are still influenced by the flesh.
For since there is, and here he names two things that he's seeing in this congregation in Corinth, he says, since there's still jealousy and dissension among you, you are not influenced by the flesh and behaving like
Are you not influenced by the flesh and behaving like unregenerate people?
So he comes after them, and his key critique is, why aren't you more grown up?
Why are you still infants?
And at this point, you should be much older in your faith.
If you are coming on Wednesday evenings, and if you're not, here's a bit of a plug, the emotional, healthy spirituality class we started this past Wednesday, there was a quote in there from one of the gentlemen who had participated in the class from before.
And he said, I had been a Christian for 22 years.
And instead of being a 22 year old Christian,
I was just a one-year-old Christian 22 times, which is precisely what Paul's saying in 1 Corinthians, right?
And it's maybe my concern for all of us that somehow, despite being in the faith for five years, 10 years, 40 years more, right?
We end up with faiths that are just repeating the same here over and over and over again.
And so I'd submit to you that just because you've been in the church for 80 years, we'll say, doesn't necessarily buy on its face that number doesn't make you an 80-year-old Christian.
And so my deep concern is that the church worldwide, actually, especially in America here,
has a bunch of infant Christians running around, acting as if they are mature Christians simply because they've been in the church long enough.
I do not want this for Southrend Baptist Church, and I certainly don't want this for each of you.
And so today's message is about how we can all grow up in the faith and put behind our infant ways and become mature Christians that Paul is calling us into.
What I just said there was the nice way of saying it.
If I could dig a little deeper, it would go this way.
If I could poke even more like poignantly at each of you, I would say it this way.
Maturity in Christ is a sign that you
are walking in the way of Jesus.
And we all know it when we see it, what that maturity looks like.
But maturity is a sign you are walking in the way of Jesus, that you're being discipled by Jesus.
And if you are not growing, if indeed you are living a life where just like for 40 years, you're a one year old Christian over and over again,
then you should stop and ask yourself, am I even following Jesus or am I just going through some church motions?
If you're a 40-year-old Christian and still acting like a toddler, this is no longer a personality quirk.
You can't just simply say, this is who I am.
I can't say it anymore clearly than this.
You're simply living in sin.
It is a sin of omission probably, but it is a sin nonetheless.
A sin of negligence, a lack of care in your own growth.
And when I look around the Christian landscape in the United States, I see that the church seems to have made it very comfortable for those 40-year-old Christians to remain infants
And I think it has risen to the level of a crisis.
So let me be clear, maturity and growth is not about becoming more powerful.
It's not about becoming more successful or popular or whatever worldly standard you might put to it.
Maturity looks like humility of all things, but mostly it looks like Christ, leading with a servant's heart.
the things Jesus did.
And if you're 40 years into your faith journey, and you're not really that much closer to looking like Jesus than you were 20 years ago, or 30, or even 40 years ago, then we've got a real problem on our hands.
And I hope today will be a day where you take seriously the call into discipleship.
And I want to offer you a tool on how to do this.
We'll get there momentarily.
400 years before Jesus lived, there was a man named Socrates who you've probably heard of.
And he had any number of wise things to say.
He kicked off Western philosophy as we know it.
But one of them is that the unexamined life is not worth living.
Who has heard this phrase?
The unexamined life is not worth living.
fewer than I thought, wow, that's interesting.
The unexamined life, so what I think he means by this is well, any number of things, but it's the recognition that we must put a magnifying glass over our very lives, and life generally needs to be understood, like generally as in like through the sciences or understanding what's going on out there, but especially like interior, like our interior lives must be understood and we must
think and examine what's really going on.
And he says, and I happen to agree with him, that this is the only way to virtue, to becoming people of character, people who live lives that are just and right.
And so I'd contend that the 40-year-old Christian, who is still acting like a toddler, is almost certainly living an unexamined life.
And my hope today is to draw you into living the examined life.
Psalm 139, 23 to 24 is our text, and it goes like this.
Search me, oh God, and know my heart.
Try me, test me, and know my thoughts.
See if there is any
grieve this way or offensive way in me?
Is there anything that offends my brothers and sisters?
Is there anything that offends you, God, in my way?
And then lead me in ways, paths that are everlasting, the kind of path that goes on and on and on.
Like, that's what I want, right?
And so this passage is an invitation into the examined life.
Someone who is quite literally, David here, asking God, God, I want you to look in.
I open my heart up to you and I need you to see what's in there and I need to show me what the path is that is the righteous path.
The path that leads to life, like real life, abundant life, the good life,
Because only you can show me that.
And so God, search me.
Know my heart.
Know my mind.
I want it to be set on you.
Socrates also said other things in his life, one of which is quite simpler yet.
Know thyself.
On Baylor's campus where I was a student for a time, you'd walk across this one path and there'd be like famous quotes everywhere.
And one of the prominent spot on the ground etched in the ground was Socrates, know thyself, right?
Know thyself.
This one I think is a life pursuit.
Knowing thyself, it seems like something that you should just inherently be able to do.
It seems like it on the surface.
I know me better than you know me, you think.
And yet we all know that this isn't actually entirely true.
Think of you as an 18-year-old or maybe your 18-year-old child or somebody who's getting ready to move into the world as an adult.
Do they know themselves?
Well, sorta.
But if they're being honest, or if I'm being honest at age 18, I should probably ask mom and dad a little more about, well, who am I?
What was I like as a kid?
And what are the things that make me come alive?
And where are my weaknesses?
And what are my gifts in life?
And all of these things, these are not self-evident.
You don't just sit down and write them out.
I mean, some people are good at knowing this, better at knowing this than other people, but knowing thyself is actually a lifelong task.
One that I would encourage you on because I think it directly connects with what we're talking about today, the examined life and the ability to ask God, search me and know me in some ways it starts with knowing oneself.
And now you might be thinking, Eric,
Why are you quoting this Western philosopher who was not a Christian or a Jew?
He's not in our canon.
He's not in our Bible.
And so I want to now submit to you a few other Christian authors through the ages.
And here again is a pitch to come to Wednesday nights, emotionally healthy spiritually, where in chapter two, he lays these out in a way that even stunned me.
And so let me quote for you from our tradition.
Starting with St. Augustine, he says this, how can you draw close to God when you are far from your own self?
And then he prayed, Grant Lord, that I may know myself, that I may know you.
There's a lot there.
Fast forwarding through time.
Meister Eckhart, 13th century, Dominican.
None can know God who does not first know himself.
Fast forwarding again, St. Teresa of Avila.
Almost all problems in the spiritual life
stem from a lack of self-knowledge.
Lastly, for the Calvinists in our midst and an ode to Clint, he and I often talk about our
reformed brothers and sisters and the Reformation period.
Calvin himself might be the last person, if you know anything about Calvin, who you would expect to say something like this.
And yet here it is in the opening lines of his epic tone, the Institutes of Christian Religion, he says the following.
Our wisdom consists almost entirely of two parts.
the knowledge of God and of ourselves.
But as these are connected together by many ties, it is not easy to determine which of the two knowledge of ourselves or knowledge of God precedes and gives birth to the other.
To know oneself, to know thyself, I do believe
is a necessary requirement, certainly of living the examined life.
I think of living a mature Christian life, a life that is transformed by Jesus.
And in part because it starts with knowing yourself so that you can take off the false ways in which you think you need to perform in the world.
So that instead of performing for other people because you think they need you to be someone, a pastor or a NASA scientist or some top exec at the DOD or whatever role you play in life.
That's not who you are.
Or maybe it's like your wealth or your possessions
And you say, well, if I have these, then this is who I am.
And I would say, no.
No, this is not who you are.
There's something under there that is much more important.
You must know yourself because that is not who you are.
That's just a mask sitting in front of you.
So in order to transform, we must begin with knowing thyself.
The solution, of course, is from our passage today.
I'll read it again.
Psalm 139, 23 to 24.
Search me, O God.
Search me and know my heart.
Try me and know my thoughts and see if there's anything grievous in my ways and lead me in your ways which are everlasting.
And I want you to notice perhaps the most important part of all of this, which is to say that
that David here isn't just saying, I'm searching within myself.
I do think this is important to know thyself.
It requires some sort of interior introspection.
But he's actually calling on God to search him.
And he is saying, God, I want to think your thoughts.
And you can even imagine David himself envisioning, how does God see me?
From God's point of view, when he looks down at my life and my actions, and he looks into my heart, what does he find there?
What does he see me doing?
What does he see me thinking?
And David goes on, he says, may it not be anything that brings offense to others and to you,
And maybe it may be a thing that leads me down paths of righteousness.
This almost is asking God to do the searching.
And he is searching himself through the eyes of God.
And so he might think back on his day when he stubbed his toe and he might say, God, I wonder what you thought of that.
Or when he stormed out on his boss.
God, I wonder what you thought of that.
Or when someone iced out their spouse by not speaking to them for days, the psalmist or you might say, search me.
Know my heart.
Help me see the world.
Help me see my world as you see it.
Because here's the truth about you and about me.
and about all humans.
We are the iceberg that is on the cover of this study that we're doing together, right?
And the iceberg, it looks like, as we all know iceberg, it kind of has this spot that's on the top of the water.
And then you've got this rest of it that's way under the water, right?
And we often think of our lives as that which sits up here.
That is not the whole of your life.
It feels like it is, it looks like it is, but that is not the whole of your life.
And if there's anything I've learned over many years of study and thinking about how humans work and how scripture works and how theology works, it's this.
A number of years ago, I did a study on the seven deadly sins.
And two people, turns out, can commit one act, which sits up here, murder, we'll say, murder.
The underneath part of it all is two very different things.
So you might be tempted to think, oh, well, this problem, this person has the problem of, of murder.
When in reality, one of them has a problem of anger, one of the deadly sins, right?
And they have allowed anger to take over their heart on a regular basis.
And it was the anger that's sitting under the surface
that drives them to do this awful heinous act.
And then a different person, well, they might not actually have that much anger, except in the moment, of course, but instead, what do they have?
Well, maybe they have envy.
They're so envious of this person and it's eating them alive.
And it causes them to do the heinous act.
And so you might be thinking, well, Eric, what does this have to do with our message today?
It has everything to do with the message.
Because if you say to God, search me and know me.
And your answer is, okay, now I won't commit murder.
You've not done enough work.
Search me and know me.
Why am I so angry underneath the surface?
What is causing that anger and God, how?
Can I give that over to you?
How can I allow that to be transformed by you so that the anger is no longer causing me to even consider something as terrible as murder?
Or likewise, envy.
God, figure out this envy that, search me and know me.
That envy is sitting under there and I cannot do, I can't figure out why it's there.
But I'm feeling it, and I know it is, and I don't want it there anymore, because the last thing I want to happen is to accidentally murder somebody.
I shouldn't laugh about that.
Hopefully you get the idea.
This prayer, this Psalm 139 prayer, seems so simple, right?
Search me and know me.
But my suggestion to you is if you're doing this on a regular basis, what you're going to find is God will begin to reveal more and more and more.
And as you plumb the depths under the water and get below the surface of it all, you'll realize there's a lot of you left to be explored and understood and healed and it will change everything.
It will change the way you work in your relationships.
It will change how you treat the people around you, your children, your spouse, your mom, your dad, your coworkers, your friends, your church mates.
It will change everything.
If again, you allow God to search me and know me.
All right, so I am going to leave us with a tool.
I've gone.
and I've given you a cheat sheet and it's on your bulletin.
And the cheat sheet says this, if you see at the top on the backside where there's normally a notes section, I've essentially written the notes for you.
Here's my expectation that you will all put this very important place in your pocket, next to your bedside, in your Bible,
And that you will consider doing this on a at least weekly.
I would recommend, I should say daily basis is what you should be aiming for.
It is called The Examine.
It's by a guy named St. Ignatius of Loyola.
And this is something I've talked about before.
If you were here when we talked about Pete Gregg's How to Pray book, I mentioned it then.
And it is in that book, and the four Rs are from him.
And so I'm simply repeating this for you.
But the prayer is quite simple, really.
It is a prayer of examination, and it goes like this.
At the end of a long day, you lay your head down, or maybe you just kind of get away for five minutes from the kids and everybody else, and you just spend some time in silence.
and you begin by replaying the events of the day.
Nonjudgmental, you don't need to like, you know, go through and every bit, just kind of see, just start thinking about what happened that day.
Where were you and who did you bump into and what comes up, like what was important, what caused some like really positive emotions maybe and some, what caused you anxiety or frustration
You know, just think through the day.
Step two then is to rejoice.
And for some of you, this is maybe the most important work you'll do because it's quite likely that a few of us in here struggle with thinking that the world is darker than it actually is, that it's not a good place, that maybe God is absent from it and is not showing up in your life.
And the challenge of this second rejoicing part is as you go through that day, you think to yourself, well, this was a really beautiful moment where a friend of mine told me a compliment and it meant a lot to me.
And then this other part was so nice.
I had a success at work today that I didn't expect and that felt really good.
And then you go through your day and you rejoice and you thank God for these things.
And there's something in that part of the practice that for those of you who may struggle with an absentee God will begin to realize that God is showing up in your life on a pretty regular basis if you have eyes to see it.
And then there's the third one, which is the repentance part.
And this is where you take stock of your day and you say, okay, this happened, and I wish I could have a redo.
I wish I could do that part again.
And it might be a big thing, right?
It might be like a knockdown drag out fight with your mom or something, and you wished you could just do it all over again.
But it might be something small.
And my guess is over time, if you're doing this regularly,
It's actually the small things that will become most important because that's where the stuff under the surface lives.
It's the small things you begin to notice about the way you're walking through the world and the way you respond to somebody with an unnecessary negativity or you respond to somebody thinking the worst of them rather than thinking of the best in them.
And then in that moment you get to ask yourself, well, why did I do that?
Why did I not open my heart to this person?
Why didn't I give them the grace that they deserved and that Jesus would have given them?
What has happened in my life to cause me to be that person?
And then, step four, reboot.
Anything about tomorrow?
The next day, and you say to yourself, well, tomorrow is going to be different.
And I am going to pivot out of that way of being that holds me down and that requires the repentance.
And I am going to be a different person tomorrow with the help of God and the Holy Spirit working through me.
I am changing.
So this is it.
This is the daily examine.
This is the full name, the daily examine.
And it's something that I would encourage you to
Hold on to very simple little practice.
But I think it is the beginning of an examined life.
Now I'm going to give you the chance to actually practice it in real time.
We're going to take communion here.
And if there's ever a time to think about examining one's life, well, Paul tells us very clearly as we approach
the table, we must search within ourselves, asking God for forgiveness, asking if there's anything in between me and God that he might rid us of that.
This is a wonderful time to practice the exam and in your own life.
And maybe you're thinking back through today, but maybe yesterday, rather, maybe it's this last week,
And just kind of go through, as you're holding the bread and the cup in your hands, and you're waiting for us to take communion together, and you're holding the body and blood of Christ, and you're looking into the face of Jesus, and he's looking back at you, what is standing between the two of you?
Confess that to him, reboot, and prepare for the next day.
Let's pray together.
Heavenly Father, I pray a prayer of blessing unto those who are gathered right now.
I would ask that you open their hearts to what it is you're doing in them.
Stir in them anew, a sense that you are alive and well in their hearts and lives, and you desire change.
You desire it so much, God, that you send your son, Jesus Christ, to die, and to be raised again from the dead, that we might, too, live new lives, lives of transformation, lives of resurrection, lives that have died to the old self and been raised anew.
So today, Lord, we come confessing
We come examining, and most of all, we come giving thanks for Jesus Christ, our Lord, and our Savior.
We ask a blessing on the bread and to the cup.
In Christ's name we pray.
Amen.